# ILDPerformance/dEdx

Performance plots for dE/dx .

- U. Einhaus, Apr 2019

## Overview

The content is a processor, the *dEdxAnalyser* processor, and a root script, the *ILDPerformance_dEdxHistPlotter*, which can be compiled to an executable.
The processor can be run with the attached steering file steer_example.xml.


## dEdxAnalyserProcessor

The *dEdxAnalyser* processor loops through tracks to collect their dE/dx, fills various histograms and calculates dE/dx resolution and separation power.
Everything is stored in an AIDA-generated root-file.
Various plots can be automatically produced in the current working directory.

The required collections are Tracks, a TrackMCTruthLink and the corresponding MCParticles.
If tracks attached to PFOs should be used, also a PFO collection is required.
The number of particle species to be investigated and their properties are hard-coded and must be set:
*_nPart* is the number of species, set in this header, while the PDG number and the names of the particles (for labeling the histograms) are set in the init().
default: *_nPart* = 5; species: electrons, muons, pions, kaon, protons.

First, in processEvent(), the dE/dx values of each track is filled in the corresponding histogram, resulting in Bethe-Bloch curves.
The correct PDG is received from the MCParticle linked to the track.
In end(), these histograms are then fitted with FitSlices, and the resulting mean and sigma values for each momentum bin are used to calculate resolution and separation power.
The separation power is calculated for each combination of the *_nPart* species.
All histograms, including the auto-generated fit results, are stored via AIDA in a root file.
Finally, many of the histograms can be plotted and saved as images to the current working directory.

Processor parameters:

- **plotStuff** - Set to true to switch on automatic image generation of many histograms in the current working directory.
  bool, default: false.
- **fileFormat** - Select the file extension to be used for the automatically generated images.
  string, default: .png
- **usePFOTracks** - Set to true to use tracks attached to charged PFO, instead of all tracks in the track collection. This should be used with events which are more busy than single particle files.
  bool, default: false.
You can make a track selection via the optional parameters, e. g. to reduce 'contamination' from mis-linked Tracks and MCParticles.
- **useOneTrack** - Set true if from every event only the first track should be used.
  default: false.
- **cutdEdx** - Set true if particles with a very off dE/dx value (hard-coded) should be ignored.
  default: false.
- **cutTrackPurity** - Set true if particles should be ignored, where the MCParticle is connected to more than one track.
  default: false.
- **cutD0** - Tracks with a d0 larger than the given value should be ignored. Set to 0 to accept all particles.
  default: 0.
- **cutZ0** - Tracks with a z0 larger than the given value should be ignored. Set to 0 to accept all particles.
  default: 0.

You can run this Analyser over any selection of tracks, e. g. only pion and kaon tracks.
In that case, only the pion and kaon resolution as well as only the pion-kaon separation would give sensible plots, but all other plots would be generated empty alongside.
The Analyser has mostly been used to extract the dE/dx performance from single-particle random-momentum files, but also to check e. g. 6f-ttbar events.


## dEdxHistPlotter

The dEdxHistPlotter.cc is compiled to *ILDPerformance_dEdxHistPlotter*.
It can be executed via *bin/ILDPerformance_dEdxHistPlotter*.

The *ILDPerformance_dEdxHistPlotter* runs through the output root-file of the *dEdxAnalyser* processor and produces plots of all TH1 and TH2 therein.
The difference to the processor is that the plots receive a specific ILD-like formatting.
Also, the plotter works more generically and goes through all (sub)directories of the root-file and makes plots of all TH1 and TH2.
The structure of the (sub)directories is recreated in the target folder.

The executable takes 2 necessary plus 1 optional command line inputs:
1. The root file generated by the *dEdxAnalyser* processor.
2. The target folder, in which the plots are created. This folder must exist.
3. Optionally, the file format of the plots can be specified. Default: .png

Examples:
```shell
> ./bin/ILDPerformance_dEdxHistPlotter /path/to/root/file.root /path/to/target/folder/for/plots/
> ./bin/ILDPerformance_dEdxHistPlotter /path/to/root/file.root /path/to/target/folder/for/plots/ .gif
```
